



Remote ATtestation ProcedureS (RATS)                          A. Sokolov
Internet-Draft                                           Tyche Institute
Intended status: Informational                            30 August 2026
Expires: 3 March 2027


  Composing Application-Layer Action Evidence with Remote Attestation
                               Procedures
               draft-sokolov-rats-aep-composition-latest

Abstract

   This document sketches a composition pattern in which an application-
   layer "action evidence package" (AEP) -- a signed action record that
   can be hash-linked to earlier records and that reports an action
   taken by an automated (for example, AI-agent) system, the authority
   under which it was taken, and its outcome -- is treated as Evidence
   in the sense of the RATS Architecture (RFC 9334) and bound to
   platform Evidence produced by a hardware root of trust.  The intent
   is that a single Verifier, or a composition of Verifiers, can
   appraise both the platform state and the application-layer record
   together, and emit an Attestation Result that a Relying Party can use
   to reason about _what an automated system reports it did_ and _the
   appraised state of the platform associated with that record_. The
   composition does not turn a self-reported action or outcome into an
   independently observed fact; it prevents the Relying Party from
   having to rely on an unbound operator-side log alone.  This is an
   individual sketch intended to ask the working group whether the
   pattern is already covered by existing mechanisms or warrants a short
   document.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 3 March 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Scope
   4.  Named Entities and Trust Boundaries
   5.  The Action Evidence Package
   6.  Provisional AEP EAT Claim Vocabulary
   7.  Composition with RATS
   8.  Discovery and Bootstrap
   9.  AR4SI Projection and Application Decision
   10. Grounded Use Case: A Bounded Payment Action
   11. Test Vectors
   12. Prototype Observations (Informative)
   13. Appraisal by an Open-Source RATS Verifier
   14. Security Considerations
     14.1.  Evidence Freshness and Result Applicability Are Separate
   15. Privacy Considerations
   16. IANA Considerations
   17. References
     17.1.  Normative References
     17.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgements
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   Records of automated decision-making are increasingly produced for
   accountability purposes: an action identifier, an authorising
   principal, inputs and tool calls, and an outcome, optionally hash-
   linked so that later modification is detectable.  Such an action
   evidence package (AEP) is useful but has the standard self-report
   limitation: every field is asserted by the same software stack whose
   integrity is in question.  The signature proves the record was
   produced by a key the runtime holds; it does not prove what the
   runtime _was_.

   The RATS Architecture [RFC9334] separates the party that produces
   Evidence (Attester), the party that appraises it (Verifier), and the
   party that acts on the verdict (Relying Party).  Binding an AEP to
   platform Evidence appraised under RATS anchors the self-report to an
   independently appraised platform state, but does not independently
   observe the action or its external effect.  This document describes
   the composition and asks whether it is novel enough to specify.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   This document uses RATS terminology as defined in [RFC9334]: the
   roles Attester, Verifier, Relying Party, Endorser, and Reference
   Value Provider, and the conceptual messages Evidence, Endorsements,
   Reference Values, and Attestation Results.

3.  Scope

   This document defines a composition pattern and a provisional claim
   vocabulary.  It does not define an appraisal algorithm, mandate
   language, discovery protocol, transparency service, or authorisation
   policy.  In particular, a Verifier decides how Evidence supports an
   Attestation Result, and a Relying Party decides whether that result
   and the referenced authority permit an action.  The examples in this
   document do not turn an application authorisation decision into a
   RATS trustworthiness claim.

4.  Named Entities and Trust Boundaries

   RATS roles are functions rather than deployment units.  The following
   entities name the functions used in this composition.  An
   implementation can co-locate them, but it MUST preserve the role and
   key boundaries in its evidence and policy records.

   Action Principal  The person or organisation whose authority is
      referenced by the action.  This is an application role, not a new
      RATS role.

   Mandate Issuer  The entity that signs or otherwise authenticates the
      bounded authority.  It can also be an Endorser only when it
      separately vouches for capabilities of the Attester in the sense
      of [RFC9334]; signing a mandate does not by itself produce a RATS
      Endorsement or appraise platform Evidence.

   Agent Runtime Attester  The entity that produces the AEP Evidence.
      In the minimal deployment, it contains a software Attesting
      Environment implemented by the action recorder and a co-located
      runtime Target Environment whose behaviour is being reported.  Co-
      location is permitted by [RFC9334] but leaves the AEP as a self-
      report until it is bound to independently appraised platform
      Evidence.

   Platform Attesting Environment  The TPM- or TEE-backed combination
      that collects Claims about the platform Target Environment,
      protects the attestation key, and produces platform Evidence.  A
      TPM alone does not collect Claims; the measurement component that
      feeds it is part of the Attesting Environment.  This environment
      binds the AEP digest or linking claim to measured state.

   Verifier  The entity that appraises the AEP Evidence and platform
      Evidence against Appraisal Policy for Evidence, Reference Values,
      and Endorsements, and emits an Attestation Result.

   AgentRuntimeEndorser  A legacy deployment label for a service that
      may appraise runtime Evidence, validate a mandate, and issue an
      application-layer statement binding the appraised runtime to that
      mandate.  That statement is not a RATS Endorsement merely because
      of the deployment label, and the label is not a new RATS role.  A
      deployment that combines Verifier, Endorser, and application
      binding functions MUST identify which output was produced under
      which function, key, and policy.

   Relying Party  The entity that consumes the Attestation Result and
      application authority and decides whether to accept the action or
      its record.

   Audit Consumer  An auditor or audit service that correlates the AEP
      with interaction, delegation, authorisation-transition, and
      service-side records.  This aligns with the consumer role in
      [I-D.kuehlewind-audit-architecture].

   The deployment Trusted Computing Base (TCB) includes the action
   recorder and binding gate, the Platform Attesting Environment, the
   Verifier implementation and policies, the configured trust-anchor
   path for Endorsements and Reference Values, and the keys used to
   authenticate mandates and results.  Artifact stores, mirrors, and
   transports need not be trusted for integrity when every consumed
   object is authenticated and freshness-checked.  This TCB statement is
   deployment guidance; TCB is not introduced as a RATS architectural
   role.

5.  The Action Evidence Package

   An AEP is an application-layer, signed action record.  For the
   purposes of this document its salient properties are: (a) it reports
   an action, an authorising principal, and an outcome; (b) it can link
   to a predecessor for tamper-evidence, although a hash chain alone
   does not prevent truncation or equivocation; and (c) it is produced
   by the same software stack that performs the action.  Property (c) is
   precisely why it benefits from composition with platform Evidence.

   More precisely, this document distinguishes the _AEP Record_ from the
   _AEP Evidence Claims-Set_. The AEP Record can contain a richer event
   log.  The AEP Evidence Claims-Set identifies one action and binds
   digests of the authority, canonical action, outcome, optional
   predecessor record, and platform Evidence.  A conversation record
   such as [I-D.birkholz-verifiable-agent-conversations] or a
   distributed audit record such as [I-D.kuehlewind-audit-architecture]
   can be carried as a submodule only when encoded as one of the
   submodule forms permitted by [RFC9711]; otherwise it can be
   referenced by a separately defined integrity-protected digest.  It is
   not copied wholesale into every claim.

6.  Provisional AEP EAT Claim Vocabulary

   The surrounding EAT Claims-Set can use the iat, exp, eat_nonce, and
   submods claims according to [RFC9711] and the selected encoding.  The
   following new application claims are expressed in CDDL [RFC8610] and
   use provisional string labels for review.  The CDDL deliberately does
   not restate the standard EAT claims: their labels and value types
   differ between CBOR and JSON, and a full profile must select and
   specify those encodings.  This document does not request numeric
   claim keys or reserve an IANA code point.  In particular, the text-
   labelled CDDL below is a vocabulary review aid and is not, by itself,
   a valid CBOR-encoded EAT profile: [RFC9711] requires CBOR-encoded EAT
   claim keys to use integer labels.

   aep-claims = {
     "aep_action_id" => tstr,
     "aep_authority_ref" => digest-ref,
     "aep_action_digest" => digest-ref,
     "aep_outcome_digest" => digest-ref,
     ? "aep_previous_digest" => digest-ref,
     "aep_platform_evidence_ref" => digest-ref,
     ? "aep_audit_context" => audit-context
   }

   digest-ref = {
     "hash_alg" => "sha-256",
     "digest" => bstr
   }

   audit-context = tstr

   Each digest covers a deterministic byte string selected by the
   profile using the stated hash algorithm.  The profile or vector MUST
   identify those exact bytes and any canonicalisation rule; hashing an
   ambiguous in-memory object or an unspecified JSON serialisation does
   not produce an interoperable binding.

   This revision does not define a complete EAT profile in the sense of
   Section 6.3 of [RFC9711]: the encoding, serialisation, protection,
   and claims-requirement items listed there are not settled by the
   prototype reported here.  Section 6.2 of [RFC9711] states that the
   eat_profile claim MUST NOT be used to identify a partial profile, so
   this revision names none and presents the vocabulary with text labels
   only.  Settling those items, and stating the CBOR and JSON encodings,
   is expected before any profile identifier or numeric label assignment
   is proposed.

   Any complete profile derived from this vocabulary that claims the AEP
   Evidence Claims-Set and platform Evidence were produced within the
   same freshness window MUST require the eat_nonce claim in the AEP
   Evidence.  Its Appraisal Policy for Evidence MUST compare the
   applicable received nonce value with the expected challenge that
   scopes the composition, and MUST reject the AEP Evidence if the claim
   is absent or if none of the applicable received nonce values equals
   that challenge.  Merely carrying an eat_nonce without performing this
   comparison does not establish freshness.

   aep_action_id  An identifier unique in the action producer's domain.
      It supports duplicate and replay detection but is not, by itself,
      proof of uniqueness.

   aep_authority_ref  A digest of the exact mandate, grant, or other
      authority evaluated for this action.

   aep_action_digest  A digest of the canonical action request as
      observed at the point where effect can occur.

   aep_outcome_digest  A digest of the canonical outcome or effect
      record.  A success assertion without independently observable
      effect evidence remains an application-layer claim.

   aep_previous_digest  The digest of the preceding AEP Record when the
      producer maintains a hash chain.

   aep_platform_evidence_ref  The linking digest for the platform
      Evidence or Attestation Result bound at record time.

   aep_audit_context  An opaque, producer-scoped correlation handle that
      lets an Auditor relate this record to the surrounding Interaction,
      Delegation, and Authorization Transition Records.  Its internal
      structure is deployment-defined:
      [I-D.kuehlewind-audit-architecture] proposes its own context-
      propagation fields, and this document does not restate them.  It
      is correlation context, not an authorisation decision, and it can
      be identifying; see Section 15.

   The AEP Evidence Claims-Set MUST receive integrity protection that
   covers the action, authority, outcome, and platform references.  This
   revision does not select the EAT protection mechanism or algorithms;
   a full profile must do so.  A locator, if used to retrieve a detached
   object, is not a substitute for an integrity-protected digest.

7.  Composition with RATS

   The composition treats the AEP as application-layer Evidence conveyed
   alongside platform Evidence:

   1.  The platform produces hardware-rooted Evidence (for example, a
       TPM quote over measured-boot registers, or a TEE attestation
       token), appraised against Reference Values (for example, conveyed
       as a Concise Reference Integrity Manifest [I-D.ietf-rats-corim])
       and Endorsements by a Verifier.

   2.  The AEP Record and an EAT carrying the AEP Evidence Claims-Set
       are distinct payloads.  When an AEP Record is carried in a Record
       CMW, either standalone or as an entry of a Collection CMW,
       application/vnd.aep+zip is the Record CMW's type value.  An EAT
       whose Claims-Set carries the AEP Evidence claims is identified by
       the applicable EAT media type defined by [RFC9782], such as
       application/eat+cwt or application/eat+jwt; when carried in a
       Record CMW, that media type is its type value.  A future complete
       profile selects the EAT encoding and protection according to
       [RFC9711].  A Collection CMW -- the RATS Conceptual Message
       Wrapper [RFC9999] -- can group a platform-Evidence CMW entry with
       a Record CMW entry carrying either the AEP Record or the EAT.
       EAT submodules can carry a nested Claims-Set, nested token, or
       Detached-Submodule-Digest; the last of these is a digest of a
       detached Claims-Set and is not a generic digest wrapper for an
       arbitrary AEP Record.

   3.  A Verifier -- or, following the layered Platform-Verifier /
       Workload-Verifier pattern of [I-D.ietf-rats-multi-verifier], a
       platform Verifier and an application Verifier in composition --
       appraises both and emits an Attestation Result.

   The binding between the two is load-bearing: the AEP, at record time,
   SHOULD incorporate a reference to a fresh platform appraisal (or to
   the platform Evidence and the nonce that scoped it), so that a later
   Relying Party can ask not only "what does the automated system report
   that it did, and under what authority?" but "and is that report bound
   to a platform whose state was independently attested within the same
   freshness window?".  The [RFC9334] Section 10 freshness mechanisms --
   nonces, synchronised-clock timestamps, and Epoch IDs/handles -- apply
   unchanged.  A composition that makes the same-window claim using EAT
   nonces is subject to the profile requirement in Section 6.

   When the composition is modelled as Evidence for a composite or
   layered Attester in a single Collection CMW, Section 8.2 of [RFC9999]
   requires the Evidence messages to be cryptographically bound
   together.  The binding need not be an outer signature: it can be
   achieved through identifiers or linking claims, such as nonces,
   across the collection's items.  An integrity-protected digest link
   from the AEP Evidence to the corresponding platform Evidence can
   contribute to that binding, but the collection designer must ensure
   that the complete set of items is protected against substitution as
   Section 8.2 requires.

8.  Discovery and Bootstrap

   This composition does not assume zero-input discovery.  Before it can
   accept an Endorsement, Reference Value, Verifier result, mandate, or
   AgentRuntimeEndorser output, a deployment has at least one local
   input: for example, a configured trust anchor, a configured signed
   trusted-list URI, or a provisioning channel.  DNS, DHCP, Web
   discovery, and registries can distribute locators, but none creates
   authority without a configured acceptance rule.

   In one deployment pattern, the Relying Party starts from a configured
   URI for a signed trusted list.  It authenticates the list to a
   locally configured root, checks list status, validity and service
   history, and uses the resulting entry to locate an
   AgentRuntimeEndorser.  Authority therefore traces to the configured
   root and policy, not merely to possession of an endpoint key.

9.  AR4SI Projection and Application Decision

   The composition has two outputs that must not be collapsed.  First, a
   Verifier can emit an EAR [I-D.ietf-rats-ear] containing an AR4SI
   trustworthiness vector [I-D.ietf-rats-ar4si] for facets it actually
   appraised.  Second, application policy computes Authorised,
   Unauthorised, or Indeterminate from the authority and action claims.
   The application decision is not an AR4SI tier.

   This document proposes no projection of its own.  What follows is a
   report of the values one open-source Verifier returned when the
   platform-side experiment was exercised against it, as described in
   Section 13:

   *  in the good state, the Verifier populated executables with the
      affirming value 2;

   *  when the selected PCR composite diverged from the provisioned
      Reference Value, it populated executables with 33, a warning-tier
      value, while returning an overall contraindicated status;

   *  when one byte inside the signed attestation structure was altered,
      it set 99 on every facet and returned contraindicated, recording a
      signature-verification problem;

   *  in Cases A and B the remaining facets carried the value 0.  AR4SI
      defines that value as "No assertion": the Evidence was
      insufficient to make a conclusion.  Although AR4SI describes an
      absent facet as not applicable to the submitted Evidence, it says
      that a Relying Party's appraisal policy should not distinguish
      value 0 from no Trustworthiness Claim; neither form makes a
      trustworthiness assertion.

   No projection is proposed for the action axis either.  Whether a
   composition of this kind warrants an additional trustworthiness
   claim, or is better reported through the application decision alone,
   is left as a question for the working group.

   AR4SI values are signed 8-bit integers grouped into none, affirming,
   warning, and contraindicated tiers.  The exact method by which a
   Verifier derives them is out of scope, consistent with AR4SI.
   Freshness is also separate: an expired result or nonce mismatch can
   make an otherwise valid appraisal inapplicable without inventing an
   "expired" AR4SI tier.

10.  Grounded Use Case: A Bounded Payment Action

   A person approves a mandate allowing an automated runtime to pay one
   named supplier up to a fixed amount before an expiry time.  The
   runtime later submits a payment instruction to a service.  At the
   point where the instruction can take effect, the recorder creates an
   AEP with: the mandate digest in aep_authority_ref; the canonical
   instruction digest in aep_action_digest; the service result digest in
   aep_outcome_digest; and the current platform Evidence reference in
   aep_platform_evidence_ref.  For an authorised Auditor, the audit
   context can correlate the AEP with records identifying the person,
   runtime, parent approval event, and authorisation state in force.

   The Verifier appraises the runtime and platform Evidence and emits an
   EAR.  The Relying Party separately checks that the mandate is valid,
   the supplier and amount are in scope, the action and outcome digests
   match the records it observed, the action identifier has not been
   consumed, and the EAR is applicable now.  An Auditor can then
   correlate this AEP with the Interaction, Delegation, Authorization
   Transition, and service-side Action Records described by
   [I-D.kuehlewind-audit-architecture].  The use case is grounded
   because each acceptance and refusal condition corresponds to an
   observable claim or adjacent record; it does not require disclosure
   of a model's internal reasoning.

11.  Test Vectors

   An implementation experiment should publish positive and negative
   vectors for at least the following cases.  The Verifier run described
   in Section 13 exercises the platform-axis conditions of V2 and V3 and
   the good-state platform conditions of V1.  It does not exercise V4:
   the run submitted no stale replay, and the unmodified reference
   scheme performed no nonce comparison, as Section 14.1 records.  The
   outcome-substitution case of V5, and V6 in its entirety, are
   specified here and are not claims about that run:

   V1 — known instance and approved measurement  The attestation key and
      PCR composite match provisioned material, all AEP digests bind,
      and the nonce is fresh.  The EAR is affirming for the supported
      facets; application authorisation is evaluated separately.

   V2 — measurement substitution  The quote remains correctly signed but
      the PCR composite differs from the Reference Value.  The exercised
      Verifier reports executables=33 in the warning tier and an overall
      contraindicated EAR status.

   V3 — forged platform Evidence  One byte in the signed attestation
      structure is changed.  Cryptographic validation fails and the
      result is contraindicated.

   V4 — stale replay  A previously valid quote is submitted in a session
      with a different expected nonce.  Evidence appraisal must fail
      closed even though the old signature and PCR value remain valid.

   V5 — action or outcome substitution  The platform Evidence is
      retained while the canonical action or outcome object is changed.
      The changed object no longer matches the integrity-protected
      digest in the AEP Evidence; when the outcome digest also
      contributes to the signed platform Evidence, outcome substitution
      breaks that reverse binding as well.  The Relying Party rejects
      the record.

   V6 — authority substitution or replay  The action is paired with
      another mandate, or a consumed aep_action_id is reused.  Platform
      appraisal can remain affirming, but application policy returns
      Unauthorised.  This vector demonstrates why AR4SI and
      authorisation verdicts are separate.

   Each vector must identify the exact input bytes, expected layer of
   rejection, expected EAR fields when an EAR is produced, and expected
   application decision.  A single boolean "valid" result is
   insufficient for cross-implementation diagnosis.

12.  Prototype Observations (Informative)

   The appraisal algorithms and evidence-scheme implementation are out
   of scope.  The prototype is retained only to show that the named
   bindings and refusal cases can be exercised and to derive the minimal
   result report and test vectors above.

   A small emulated feasibility check (software TPM via swtpm, with a
   minimal Verifier stand-in) folds the hash of a synthetic AEP Record,
   which includes its outcome digest, together with a fresh nonce into
   an attestation-key-signed quote, with a model-artefact measurement in
   a platform register.  It resolves the three platform-axis cases and
   shows that the old quote fails validation when checked against
   different expected AEP-derived qualifying data.  This is a binding-
   sensitivity check, not an appraisal of the truth of the reported
   outcome or a complete implementation of the AEP Evidence Claims-Set.
   It is emulated and minimal; it demonstrates the cryptographic
   mechanism, not a hardware-rooted guarantee.  Details are in
   [ZENODO-AEP].

13.  Appraisal by an Open-Source RATS Verifier

   To compare the platform-side result vocabulary against a real
   Attestation Result rather than a stand-in, the TPM Evidence and its
   AEP-outcome-digest measurement were exercised against an instance of
   the open-source Project Veraison implementation of the RATS Verifier
   role, built and run locally.  The run did not implement the
   provisional AEP Evidence Claims-Set, convey an AEP and platform
   Evidence in one Collection CMW, or ask the Verifier to appraise
   application authorisation.  It is therefore a platform-side
   feasibility exercise, not an end-to-end implementation of the
   composition.  This is an independent exercise of an open-source
   implementation; it is NOT a claim that the implementation,
   experiment, or AEP profile is conformant, and it does not imply
   endorsement or partnership with the Veraison project.

   The platform Attesting Environment used an emulated software TPM
   (swtpm), not a hardware root of trust.  A fresh EC P-256 Attestation
   Key (AK) was created in the swtpm; the AEP outcome digest was
   measured into a Platform Configuration Register (PCR 4); and a
   genuine swtpm TPM quote was produced over PCRs 1-4 with the freshness
   nonce as qualifying data.  The quote was packed into the Verifier
   reference TPM evidence wire format (NODE_ID || SIZE || TPMS_ATTEST ||
   TPMT_SIGNATURE).  To exercise the unmodified reference scheme with a
   fixed synthetic record, a Concise Reference Integrity Manifest
   (CoRIM) was provisioned carrying two items keyed by a single instance
   identifier: the AK public key as a trust anchor, and the record-
   specific post-extension PCR composite digest as an experimental
   Reference Value.  The quote was then submitted through one challenge-
   response session per appraisal, and the Verifier returned a signed
   EAR.  Provisioning that record-specific value was a constraint of
   this bounded experiment, not the recommended deployment pattern: a
   new AEP Record normally produces a new PCR value and therefore cannot
   rely on a pre-provisioned "golden" composite for every record.

   A deployment that measures per-record AEP data instead provisions the
   approved pre-AEP platform state, including the pre-AEP value of the
   PCR selected for the record measurement.  The Attesting Environment
   records an event for the canonical AEP Record digest, extends that
   measurement into the selected PCR, and quotes the resulting PCR
   selection.  It also binds a profile-defined digest over the fresh
   nonce and the same canonical AEP Record digest into the quote
   qualifying data.  During appraisal, the Verifier replays the recorded
   PCR extend from the approved pre-AEP state to reconstruct the post-
   extension PCR value.  It combines that value with the presented
   values of any other PCRs in the quote selection, calculates the TPM
   PCR-selection composite digest, and compares the result with the
   signed pcrDigest in TPMS_ATTEST.  It separately checks the qualifying
   data against the expected nonce and AEP Record digest.  This derives
   the expected record-specific post-extension state at appraisal time
   instead of treating that state as a deployment-wide golden value.
   The event log is not accepted as a stand-alone assertion: omitting,
   reordering, or substituting its measurement events must make the
   replayed composite disagree with the signed pcrDigest.

   The verdicts below were read from the decoded EARs, which used the
   Verifier's own profile:

   *  Case A, good state with the AEP outcome digest measured into PCR
      4: the Verifier returned ear.status "affirming" against the
      record-specific experimental Reference Value.

   *  Case B, PCR 4 re-measured with a different outcome so the PCR
      composite digest diverges from that experimental Reference Value:
      "contraindicated".

   *  Case D, one byte flipped inside TPMS_ATTEST so the quote signature
      no longer verifies against the AK: "contraindicated" (tampered
      platform Evidence, rejected).

   Case A was independently re-verified outside the Verifier: the quote
   PCR digest equals the provisioned record-specific experimental value,
   and the signature verifies against the AK public key.  These are the
   two substantive appraisal checks independently repeated here, not an
   exhaustive description of the Verifier's parsing and trust-anchor
   processing.  The results confirm the observed affirming/
   contraindicated distinction used by the test vectors; they do not
   show that the reference scheme emitted every AR4SI facet proposed in
   Section 9.  Freshness is a separate condition, and the reference
   scheme used here did not enforce it, which motivates the freshness
   consideration below.

14.  Security Considerations

   Composition does not dissolve trust assumptions; it relocates them.
   The platform axis depends on the provenance and protection of the
   Attesting Environment, applicable Endorsements or directly configured
   trust anchors, Reference Values, and the Verifier's independence.
   The AEP axis depends on the action recorder and its signing key.
   Platform Evidence grounds that key or recorder only when the
   deployment measures or otherwise binds them into the appraised state;
   the experiment reported here binds an outcome digest, not the AEP
   signing key or the truth of the reported effect.  Binding an AEP to a
   platform appraisal is only as fresh as the weaker of the two
   freshness mechanisms.  Attesting a specific model or workload version
   requires that artefact be measured into the attested state, which is
   a deployment commitment.

   If a composition claims the reverse output-binding exercised here, a
   forged AEP outcome presented under otherwise-valid platform Evidence
   MUST be detectable: the outcome digest must contribute to data
   covered by the platform Evidence's integrity protection.  A one-way
   AEP reference to platform Evidence alone does not establish that
   property.  The feasibility note and the appraisal in Section 13
   demonstrate the cryptographic binding in software-TPM emulation.
   Using a hardware TPM can strengthen key protection, but it still
   proves only that the supplied digest contributed to the quoted state;
   the truth of the action or external effect depends on the recorder
   and measurement path.

14.1.  Evidence Freshness and Result Applicability Are Separate

   The platform-side appraisal above surfaced a freshness observation
   worth recording for implementers.  A challenge-response transport
   supplies a session nonce, and the EAT freshness mechanisms of RFC
   9711 are available; but whether the nonce is actually enforced
   depends on the Verifier appraisal scheme, not on the transport.  In
   the unmodified reference TPM scheme exercised here, the appraisal
   performed quote-signature and PCR-reference checks, but it did not
   compare the nonce the Attester bound into the quote qualifying data
   (the ExtraData field of TPMS_ATTEST) against the session expected
   nonce.  As a result, a replayed or stale quote, correctly signed over
   a matching PCR state, could still be appraised as affirming.  The
   unmodified run applied no freshness check at any layer: neither the
   reference scheme nor the surrounding experiment compared the bound
   nonce against the session expected nonce.

   Evidence freshness belongs in the Verifier's Appraisal Policy for
   Evidence.  The idiomatic remedy has two small, separable pieces and
   applies generally to any scheme whose Evidence carries an attester-
   bound nonce in signed qualifying data: (1) the appraisal scheme
   surfaces the attester-bound qualifying data (here,
   TPMS_ATTEST.ExtraData) as an extracted claim, so that an appraisal
   policy has a value to compare; and (2) the appraisal policy compares
   that claim against the expected nonce retained for the session and
   returns a contraindicated verdict when they differ.  If a deployment
   cannot perform that comparison inside the Verifier, the outer
   application must fail closed and record the compensating check rather
   than silently treating the otherwise-affirming result as fresh.  This
   is an observation about a community-maintained reference scheme, not
   a deployed production trust service.

   The Relying Party has a separate freshness decision after the
   Verifier issues an Attestation Result.  At the moment it performs an
   operation, it decides whether that result remains applicable under
   its Appraisal Policy for Attestation Results and its application
   policy.  This includes any result expiry or local maximum age,
   binding to the exact AEP, action and request context, and single-use
   or consumed state where the application requires it.  A historical
   record can remain cryptographically valid while no longer authorising
   a replay.  The effective freshness of an AEP/platform composition is
   therefore bounded by the weaker of the Evidence-appraisal window and
   the result/action-applicability window.

15.  Privacy Considerations

   The actor, on-behalf-of party, trace identifiers, action, mandate,
   outcome, platform identity, and timing can be identifying or
   commercially sensitive even when represented only by digests.  Stable
   identifiers can enable correlation across actions and administrative
   domains.  A producer SHOULD disclose only claims needed by the
   Relying Party, use context-scoped identifiers where global
   correlation is unnecessary, and place sensitive conversation or audit
   records in access-controlled detached objects rather than inline
   submodules.

   Digesting low-entropy fields does not anonymise them.  A party that
   can guess a supplier, amount, tool name, or mandate text can test the
   guess against a disclosed digest.  Profiles therefore need explicit
   disclosure, retention, and salt/keyed-commitment decisions.  An
   Auditor's need to reconstruct a record does not imply that every
   Relying Party should receive the underlying conversation or authority
   object.

16.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests no IANA actions.

   The media type application/vnd.aep+zip, which identifies an AEP
   carried as a Record CMW or as an entry of a Collection CMW [RFC9999],
   was registered in the vendor tree of the "Media Types" registry on
   2026-08-17, independently of this document; the change controller is
   Tyche Institute.  Registration in the vendor tree records a name and
   the party that controls it.  It is not an IETF consensus action, and
   it implies no review of this document, nor of the format the name
   identifies.

   If a future revision requests registered EAT claim labels for the
   provisional vocabulary of Section 6, the corresponding registrations
   would appear here.

17.  References

17.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8610]  Birkholz, H., Vigano, C., and C. Bormann, "Concise Data
              Definition Language (CDDL): A Notational Convention to
              Express Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR) and
              JSON Data Structures", RFC 8610, DOI 10.17487/RFC8610,
              June 2019, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8610>.

   [RFC9334]  Birkholz, H., Thaler, D., Richardson, M., Smith, N., and
              W. Pan, "Remote ATtestation procedureS (RATS)
              Architecture", RFC 9334, DOI 10.17487/RFC9334, January
              2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9334>.

   [RFC9711]  Lundblade, L., Mandyam, G., O'Donoghue, J., and C.
              Wallace, "The Entity Attestation Token (EAT)", RFC 9711,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9711, April 2025,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9711>.

   [RFC9782]  Lundblade, L., Birkholz, H., and T. Fossati, "Entity
              Attestation Token (EAT) Media Types", RFC 9782,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9782, May 2025,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9782>.

   [RFC9999]  Birkholz, H., Smith, N., Fossati, T., and H. Tschofenig,
              "Remote ATtestation procedureS (RATS) Conceptual Message
              Wrapper (CMW)", RFC 9999, DOI 10.17487/RFC9999, July 2026,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9999>.

17.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-rats-ar4si]
              Voit, E., Birkholz, H., Hardjono, T., Fossati, T., and V.
              Scarlata, "Attestation Results for Secure Interactions",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-rats-ar4si-
              10, 18 May 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-ietf-rats-ar4si-10>.

   [I-D.ietf-rats-ear]
              Fossati, T., Voit, E., Trofimov, S., and H. Birkholz, "EAT
              Attestation Results", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-ietf-rats-ear-04, 26 May 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-rats-
              ear-04>.

   [I-D.ietf-rats-corim]
              Birkholz, H., Fossati, T., Deshpande, Y., Smith, N., and
              W. Pan, "Concise Reference Integrity Manifest", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-rats-corim-11, 6 July
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-
              rats-corim-11>.

   [I-D.ietf-rats-multi-verifier]
              Deshpande, Y., Zhang, J., Labiod, H., and H. Birkholz,
              "Remote Attestation with Multiple Verifiers", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-rats-multi-verifier-
              00, 5 May 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-ietf-rats-multi-verifier-00>.

   [I-D.birkholz-verifiable-agent-conversations]
              Birkholz, H., Heldt, T., and O. Steele, "Verifiable Agent
              Conversation Records", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-birkholz-verifiable-agent-conversations-00, 25
              February 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-birkholz-verifiable-agent-conversations-00>.

   [I-D.kuehlewind-audit-architecture]
              Kuehlewind, M. and H. Birkholz, "An Architecture for
              Auditing AI Agent Delegation and Interactions", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-kuehlewind-audit-
              architecture-00, 18 May 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-kuehlewind-
              audit-architecture-00>.

   [ZENODO-AEP]
              Sokolov, A., "Hardware-rooted attestation for AI-agent
              evidence: composing IETF RATS with action evidence
              packages", July 2026,
              <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20818671>.

Acknowledgements

   Thanks to the Veraison community for the discussion that prompted
   this sketch.

Author's Address

   Anton Sokolov
   Tyche Institute
   Tallinn
   Estonia
   Email: anton.sokolov@tyche.institute
